---
title: The Three Pillars of Product Development
description:
  Exploring the crucial balance of Market-led, Vision-led, and Experience-led
  features in product development for a successful product that sells, scales,
  and stands out.
date: "2023-05-16"
tags: [product]
---

In the dynamic landscape of product development, where shifting user needs
intersect with technological progress, a finely-tuned balance is essential. I've
come to see this balance as revolving around three central types of features:
Market-led, Vision-led, and Experience-led. These categories are not rigid
silos, but fluid dimensions that often overlap and intersect. All three are
critical for a product's success and survival, and finding the right equilibrium
is more an art than a science.

## Market-led Features: The Voice of the Customer

Market-led features, are those driven by customer demand or sales potential.
They are the pivot points that help a product find its place in the market. This
category is dictated by customer feedback, sales team input, market trends, and
competitive analysis. The end goal? A product that resonates with customers and
drives sales.

However, an over-reliance on market-led features can lead to a reactive rather
than proactive product strategy, and the risk of getting lost in the noise of
what customers say they want rather than what they need. Conversely, too few
market-led features may result in a product that struggles to find a solid
foothold in the market, lacking the necessary hooks to reel in customers.

## Vision-led Features: The Founderâ€™s Foresight

Where market-led features are the response to external stimuli, vision-led
features originate from within. These are the moonshots, the game-changing
features that the founder or CEO envisions for the product. They reflect the
core ethos and strategic direction of the company, carving a unique path that
sets the product apart from the competition.

These features are essential for long-term growth and differentiation, but they
can also be risky. If they are too far ahead of the market, they may fail to
resonate with customers. A lack of vision-led features, on the other hand, may
result in a product that fails to generalize across customers or segments, which
can stifle growth.

## Experience-led Features: The Power of Iteration

Experience-led "features" may not look like features at all. They are the
refinement and optimization of existing functionality. The goal here is not
novelty, but better performance, accuracy, speed, or user experience. They are
the product of learning from past technical experiences, observing user
behaviour, and iterating on the product accordingly.

While they may not seem as flashy as market-led or vision-led features,
experience-led features are essential for a product to scale. They ensure that
the product can handle growing traffic volumes and deliver a seamless user
experience in the presence of increasing product complexity. A lack of these
features can lead to a product that doesn't scale well and, perhaps worst of
all, can slow down development velocity.

## The Equilibrium: A Balanced Feature Triad

With these three types of feature in mind, the importance of maintaining a
balance becomes apparent. A product roadmap that focuses solely on one type of
feature at the expense of the others can lead to a product that either doesn't
sell, doesn't generalize, or doesn't scale.

Of course, many features can fall into more than one category. A vision-led
feature could also be market-led if it aligns with a growing customer need. An
experience-led feature could become vision-led if it opens up new possibilities
for the product. The categories are not so much separate boxes, but intersecting
circles in a Venn diagram, each reinforcing the others.

In the end, successful product development is about maintaining this delicate
equilibrium. It requires an ongoing dance between customer needs, visionary
thinking, and continuous improvement. So, when you are building or refining your
product roadmap, consider these three dimensions. By balancing market-led,
vision-led, and experience-led features, you'll create a product that sells,
scales, and stands out in a crowded market. After all, isn't that what every
product team dreams of?
